# Benchmark

The benchmark consists of sequentially reading through all key-value entries of a specific
Minecraft: Bedrock Edition world's LevelDB database, which was 1.06 GB (0.99 GiB) in size and
contained 5&thinsp;001&thinsp;126 total entries. The benchmark counted the number of entries and
computed the crc32c checksum of all the keys and values (in order).

The benchmark could not be run on Google's `leveldb` due to its lack of support for the Zlib
compression used by the MCBE world's database.

Evaluation of the benchmark was also attempted for `rusty-leveldb v4.0.1`. However, it frequently
failed to read the database due to long hangs, necessitating manual termination of the benchmark.
Flamegraphs indicate that the poor performance is due to `rusty-leveldb` using a
cryptographic-quality random number generator to choose seek compactions, whereas the other LevelDB
implementations use fast pseudorandom number generators.

## Execution

The benchmarks were performed on a 14-inch 2021 MacBook Pro with an M1 Pro chip and 16GB of RAM running macOS 26.3.1.

The Rust implementations made use of `zlib-rs v0.5.2` (via `flate2`) to perform decompression
and used `crc32c v0.6.8` to compute the checksum, while the C++ implementations lined to the system
Zlib library (`libz v1.2.12`) and used Google's implementation of crc32c included in `leveldb`.

Benchmarks were first run under high memory pressure intentionally generated by a large number of
browser tabs and multiple VSCode windows. The laptop was then restarted and benchmarks
were run under low memory pressure. Flamegraphs of the benchmark programs were captured under low
memory pressure. During the benchamrks, macOS’s Activity Monitor was examined to ensure that memory
pressure did not substantially vary during the benchmarks.

The high memory pressure tests were run with approximately 14 GB of RAM used (4.2 app
memory, 2.6 wired memory, 6.8 compressed), 2 GB of cached files, and 7.7 GB of swap. The low
memory pressure tests were run with approximately 10 GB of RAM used (6.2 app memory, 1.8
wired memory, 1.6 compressed), 5.5 GB of cached files, and 0 swap usage.

# Results

Tables 1 and 2 each indicate times in seconds. Run 1 through Run 10 indicate the times of each
sequential iteration through the database. To account for warmup, the following row of average
times excludes Run 1. Following are the `real`, `user`, and `sys` times of each benchmark,
as reported by the system `time` utility of `zsh v5.9`.

Table 1 contains the results under high memory pressure and Table 2 contains the results under low
memory pressure.

Table 3 contains data obtained from the interactive flamegraphs in this directory.

## Table 1: Benchmarks under High Memory Pressure

|         | `anchored-leveldb` | `mojang-leveldb` | `rbedrock-leveldb` |
| ------- | ------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------ |
| Run 1   |             4.640  |           9.859  |             9.974  |
| Run 2   |             3.683  |           5.451  |             5.540  |
| Run 3   |             3.654  |           5.542  |             5.467  |
| Run 4   |             3.669  |           5.717  |             5.355  |
| Run 5   |             3.870  |           5.768  |             5.458  |
| Run 6   |             3.653  |           5.475  |             5.490  |
| Run 7   |             3.870  |           5.885  |             5.477  |
| Run 8   |             3.754  |           5.488  |             5.373  |
| Run 9   |             3.694  |           5.525  |             5.415  |
| Run 10  |             3.711  |           5.526  |             5.433  |
| Average |             3.723  |           5.597  |             5.445  |
| `real`  |            38.434  |          60.447  |            59.191  |
| `user`  |            34.836  |          45.347  |            48.581  |
| `sys`   |             2.183  |           9.974  |             9.912  |

## Table 2: Benchmarks under Low Memory Pressure

|         | `anchored-leveldb` | `mojang-leveldb` | `rbedrock-leveldb` |
| ------- | ------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------ |
| Run 1   |             4.662  |           8.595  |             4.755  |
| Run 2   |             3.780  |           4.489  |             4.499  |
| Run 3   |             3.775  |           4.526  |             4.502  |
| Run 4   |             3.810  |           4.526  |             4.485  |
| Run 5   |             3.866  |           4.502  |             4.471  |
| Run 6   |             3.849  |           4.532  |             4.447  |
| Run 7   |             3.823  |           4.534  |             4.448  |
| Run 8   |             3.894  |           4.490  |             4.477  |
| Run 9   |             3.895  |           4.590  |             4.473  |
| Run 10  |             3.865  |           4.614  |             4.479  |
| Average |             3.840  |           4.534  |             4.476  |
| `real`  |            39.444  |          49.600  |            45.055  |
| `user`  |            36.157  |          44.639  |            44.282  |
| `sys`   |             2.159  |           0.774  |             0.510  |

## Table 3: Analysis of Flamegraphs

The remaining first and second columns are calculated from percentages from the interactive
flamegraphs. The third column is the quotient of the second and first columns.

|                    | Time spent in <br/> LevelDB implementation | Time spent <br/> decompressing data | Percent of LevelDB implementation <br/> spent decompressing data |
| ------------------ | -------- | -------- | ------- |
| `anchored-leveldb` |  89.54%  |  74.40%  |  83.09% |
| `mojang-leveldb`   |  68.98%  |  56.02%  |  81.21% |
| `rbedrock-leveldb` |  69.50%  |  55.30%  |  79.56% |

## Discussion
The `anchored-leveldb` code checks for database corruption errors on every iteration, but any
performance cost from these checks is not noticeable in the flamegraph.
Before running the benchmarks, future work to address assumed inefficiency of error checks had been
planned, but those potential improvements appear to be negligible.

Due to below limitations, the benchmarks of `anchored-leveldb` at low memory pressure might
not alone indicate that `anchored-leveldb` is genuinely a faster LevelDB implementation; the
16% increase in speed could be due to differences in dependencies or other biases in the
benchmark which happen to be in `anchored-leveldb`'s favor.

However, the gap widens at higher memory pressure, suggesting that `anchored-leveldb` allocates
less data and is more efficient than the other implementations. `anchored-leveldb` does try
to reuse resources more thoroughly than other implementations. Conversely, under low memory
pressure, the percentage of the LevelDB implementations’ time spent performing decompression was
above 79% for all implementations. The compression used by Minecraft: Bedrock is expensive to the
point that single-threaded code can only improve up to 17% on `anchored-leveldb` under those
conditions. The most feasible way to improve the speed of the CPU-heavy decompression task is by
splitting the work across multiple CPU cores; any improvements in multithreaded reads should
therefore focus on decompression.

## Limitations
Given that a high percentage of time was spent performing Zlib compression and crc32c checksums,
the benchmarks are heavily influenced by the Zlib and crc32c implementations used. Judging by
the flamegraphs, the system’s Zlib decompressor used by `mojang/leveldb` and `rbedrock-leveldb`
is faster than the zlib-rs decompressor used by `anchored-leveldb`. Conversely, the crc32c imple-
mentation used by `anchored-leveldb` appears faster than the implementation used by `mojang/leveldb`
and `rbedrock-leveldb`.

Moreover, the benchmark is intentionally a simple proof-of-concept which does not suffice to
test a full database implementation.

Lastly, the C++ and Rust implementations of LevelDB necessarily used different compilers.
While both clang and rustc use LLVM as their codegen backend, there are surely differences in
optimizations applied by the compilers, and there may be compilation flags which would dredge
up better performance. The default memory allocator used by Rust and C++ programs are also
somewhat different. While similar compilation flags were passed to clang and rustc, these results
depend on the compilers’ defaults and optimizations in addition to any merits of the four LevelDB
implementations themselves.
